[Music]
to the new nation
with the conclusion of hostilities with
Great Britain the new nation turned its
attention to preparing and then
ratifying a written constitution
establishing a new federal government
the document itself as noted previously
contained provisions which appear to be
conducive to the cultivation and
development of the intelligence function
but with the disbanding of Washington's
forces the nation's leaders would
actually organize intelligence
operations in an ad hoc manner and on an
extemporaneous basis during the course
of the next century of great importance
as well for the evolution and
operationalization of the federal
intelligence function are certain of the
guarantees in the Constitution's bill of
rights among these are prohibitions
against Congress enacting any law
abridging the freedom of speech or of
the press or the right of the people to
peaceably assemble or of the right of
the public to be secure in their persons
houses papers and effects against
unreasonable searches and seizures these
strictures on governmental power could
have special significance in the event
an ambitious and zealous intelligence
program or attempted to protect the
citizenry from itself or enemies of the
state imperceptible to the people indeed
shortly after the federal government was
instituted circumstances might well have
prompted an enthusiastic intelligence
endeavor when France an old ally of the
United States was seized by the winds of
revolution the French Republic in 1793
dispatched an agent Edward Charles janay
to Charleston in South Carolina before
presenting his diplomatic credentials
janay commissioned four privateers and
dispatched them to prey upon British
shipping as France had declared war on
England he also sought to recruit an
expedition to conquer Louisiana which
was then controlled by Spain another
declared enemy of France while the
United States sought to remain neutral
in the conflict between France and
England President Washington was faced
with an agent provocateur of a foreign
power recruiting ships and men to engage
in hostilities off the American coast
and possibly marching through American
territory to engage Spanish authorities
Washington received janay with cool
formality and subsequently informed him
that his grants of military commissions
on American soil constituted an
infringement on the national sovereignty
of the United States notice was also
given that shanae's privateers would
have to leave American waters and that
their prizes could not be sent to ports
of the United States although he
initially agreed to comply with these
demands janae was soon attempting to arm
the little Sarah a recently captured
prize when warned against dispatching
the ship
janae threatened to mobilize opinion
against Washington ultimately the vessel
escaped to sea and efforts were made to
have Shanae recalled by this time
however the Jacobins had seized power in
France and a new minister to the United
States had been dispatched with orders
for Janae's arrest Washington refused to
extradite Shinae and he subsequently
became an American citizen conditions
continued to remain tense with regard to
America's relations with France in 1797
with the French directory in power
harassment sends seizures were made on
American shipping the American
ambassador to France Charles Pinckney
was refused an opportunity to present
his diplomatic credentials in an attempt
to smooth the situation the French were
basically disturbed by the terms of
Jay's treaty which in part granted
American ships entry to the British East
Indies and West Indies while placing
British trade with the United States on
a most favored nation basis President
Adams dispatched a special mission to
Paris delayed on a pretext from
beginning official negotiations the
American delegation was approached by
three agents of the foreign ministry
described in diplomatic dispatches as X
Y & Z these operatives suggested an
American loan to France and a bribe of
$240,000 to settle matters
when this offer was refused and the
failure of the negotiations reached
Adams informed Congress of the
clandestine effort and submitted the XYZ
correspondence to the legislature for
inspection and public disclosure the
dispute with France was settled by an
undeclared naval war 1798 to 1800 this
incident and the janay affair set off a
variety of conspiracy theories and fears
of foreign intrigue in America but
rather than creating any countervailing
intelligence organization the response
of the federal government appears to be
that of restrictive law the Alien and
Sedition Acts these consisted of four
statutes enacted by Congress in June and
July of 1798 which changed the residency
period for citizenship from five to
fourteen years authorized to the
President to order all aliens regarded
as dangerous to the public peace and
safety or suspected of treasonable or
secret activities out of the country
authorized to the president during a
declared war to arrest imprison or
banish aliens subjected to an enemy
power and made it a high misdemeanor
punishable by fine or imprisonment for
citizens or aliens to enter into
unlawful combinations to oppose the
execution of the national law or to
impede a federal officer from performing
his duties or to aid or attempt any
insurrection riot or unlawful assembly
quote under these circumstances the spy
fever raged Federalist Noah Webster said
that in case of any fatal disaster to
England an invasion of America may not
be improbable a congressional document
held that France and her partisans in
America would unite for the subversion
of religion morality law and government
her means the report said are in
wonderful coincidence with her ends
among these and not the least successful
is the direction and employment of the
active
and versatile talents of her citizens
abroad as emissaries and spies
Federalist journals babbled of
conspiracy and hurled insults at
anti-federalists william Cobbett peter
porcupine of porcupines gazette
announced that on May 9th 1798 ordained
as a national fast day desperate
villains would set fire to Philadelphia
but nothing happened when the innocent
dr. George Logan of that city went
abroad
porcupine smelled a rat take care he
raged when your blood runs down the
gutters don't say you are not forewarned
of the danger Volney the historian whose
journeyings had carried him to America
was branded as a French spy darkly
maneuvering to return Louisiana to
France
janay who settled peacefully on Long
Island as a naturalized American was
said to be in correspondence with the
tyrants end quote
[Music]
this is our hidden history
you